docs: tw-763-upgrade-runbook (#3490)
OffchainLabs/arbitrum-docs: docs/launch-arbitrum-chain/operate/upgrade-runbook.mdx

content_type: how-to
---

This runbook is the operational wrapper around an <a data-quicklook-from="arbitrum-chain">Arbitrum chain</a> upgrade: what to validate before you start, what order to execute in, how to confirm the upgrade succeeded, and what you can undo if it doesn't.

It complements [ArbOS upgrade](/launch-arbitrum-chain/operate/arbos-upgrade.mdx), which remains the canonical reference for how each individual step works. This page does not restate those mechanics—it links to them at each step and focuses on the coordination, verification, and failure-recovery work around them.

An upgrade touches four things that must stay mutually compatible:

1. The <a data-quicklook-from="arbitrum-nitro">Nitro</a> version running on every node and <a data-quicklook-from="validator">validator</a>.
2. The `nitro-contracts` deployed on the <a data-quicklook-from="parent-chain">parent chain</a>.
3. The <a data-quicklook-from="wasm-module-root">WASM module root</a> set in the Rollup contract.
4. The <a data-quicklook-from="arbos">ArbOS</a> version active on the <a data-quicklook-from="child-chain">child chain</a>.

> 

Reviewer: The list is missing the thing the upgrade flow actually depends on: each validator must have the WAVM machine for every root it validates.

Item 3 is the root set on-chain — but it only works if validators have the matching machine on disk. This is also what makes step 2 safe: a running validator follows the on-chain root change only if its **pending** root resolves to the new root (default: `machines/latest`, or pinned with `--node.block-validator.pending-upgrade-module-root`). That means the machine must be staged and the validator restarted *before* the root is set on-chain (see my comment on the execution order table).

Suggested item:

```markdown
4. The WAVM machines on each validator's disk—one per root the validator
   must validate (current and pending). A new Nitro version alone doesn't
   guarantee they are present.
```

…and change the next sentence to "the majority are mismatches between the on-chain root (3) and the machines on validators (4)".

Reviewer: Or can add an extra 5 point

Most failed upgrades are a mismatch between two of these four, and the majority of those are WASM module root mismatches. [Troubleshoot WASM module root failures](#troubleshoot-wasm-module-root-failures) covers those in detail.

<VanillaAdmonition type="caution" title="ArbOS upgrades are one-way">

Once an ArbOS upgrade activates, you cannot downgrade the ArbOS version. Plan on rolling forward, not back. Read [Rollback options](#rollback-options) **before** you schedule an upgrade, so you know which parts of the process are reversible and which aren't.

> 

Reviewer: Suggest one sentence making explicit that Nitro and ArbOS versions are different things — it's the mental model behind both the "bumped the image, done" and "roll back the image to recover" mistakes:

```markdown
Note that these are independent: Nitro is per-node software you can deploy and
roll back; the ArbOS version is chain-wide state, moved only by
`scheduleArbOSUpgrade`. Upgrading Nitro does not change the chain's ArbOS version.
```

| Custom STF build                                                                                   | **Yes**, and you must also rebuild the replay binary so the resulting module root matches what you set onchain       |

<VanillaAdmonition type="caution" title="The Dockerfile only downloads recent machines">

In the Nitro repository's `Dockerfile`, the `RUN ./download-machine.sh` lines for older consensus versions are **commented out**—only the most recent few are active. If your chain's Rollup contract still points at an older module root, a from-source build produces an image with no machine for that root, and your validator fails to start.

This is the single most common cause of the startup failures described below. Check the `Dockerfile` for a line matching your consensus version before assuming the image contains it.

</VanillaAdmonition>

To fetch a machine manually, run the script from your machines directory with both the consensus tag and its module root:

```shell
cd /home/user/.arbitrum/machines

> ./download-machine.sh consensus-v51 0x8a7513bf7bb3e3db04b0d982d0e973bcf57bf8b88aef7c6d03dba3a81a56a499

Reviewer 2: The consensus-v51 release notes restrict it to Arb One/Nova; other chains should use v51.1 (matches arbos51.mdx).
```suggestion
./download-machine.sh consensus-v51.1 0xc2c02df561d4afaf9a1d6785f70098ec3874765c638e3cb6dbe8d3c83333e14c
```

## Execution order

Order matters. Each step assumes the previous one completed successfully.

| Step | Action                                                                                                                                                                                      | Notes                                                                                                                        |
| ---- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| 1    | [Update Nitro on nodes and validators](/launch-arbitrum-chain/operate/arbos-upgrade.mdx#step-1-update-nitro-on-nodes-and-validators)                                                        | Validators first, then remaining nodes. **Must** complete before the ArbOS upgrade deadline                                  |

> | 2    | [Set the new WASM module root](/launch-arbitrum-chain/operate/arbos-upgrade.mdx#step-2-upgrade-the-wasm-module-root--your-chains-nitro-contracts)                                           | Safe to do early; roots are backward compatible                                                                              |

Reviewer: "Safe to do early" has a hidden precondition, and the error it can trigger is missing from the table below.

A running validator only accepts a new on-chain root if it equals the validator's **pending** root ([`SetCurrentWasmModuleRoot`](https://github.com/OffchainLabs/nitro/blob/531a7c87c6435d758e8deed520c326c840ff1a0e/staker/block_validator.go#L609-L635)). Otherwise:

```
unexpected wasmModuleRoot! cannot validate! found <onchain>, current <x>, pending <y>
```

The legacy staker then stops acting completely; BoLD only warns. Also, pending and the machine list are read **once at startup** — staging a machine without a restart does nothing.

Suggested changes:
1. Add this error to the table (node runs; legacy staker halts, BoLD warns).
2. Step 2 note: "Safe to do early, **as long as every validator has been restarted with the target machine and its startup log shows `pending=<target root>`**."
3. In the pre-upgrade machine check: mention the restart, and check the `BlockValidator initialized … pending=` log line *before* step 2, not only after the upgrade.
4. Mention that pending can be pinned explicitly with `--node.block-validator.pending-upgrade-module-root=<target root>` instead of relying on the `latest` symlink (the default). The machine must still be on disk either way, or startup fails with `cannot validate WasmModuleRoot`.

</VanillaAdmonition>

## Post-upgrade verification

Work through all four checks. A chain can look healthy on the surface while its validator is quietly unable to bond.

### Verify the active ArbOS version

Call `ArbSys.ArbOSVersion()` again and confirm it advanced to your target, remembering the +55 offset. If the scheduled timestamp has passed and the version has not changed, the upgrade did not activate—check that you scheduled the correct version and that nodes are actually producing blocks past the timestamp.

### Verify the WASM module root matches everywhere

Compare the root set in the Rollup contract against the root your validator resolved. Read the onchain value from the parent chain:

```shell
cast call <rollup-address> "wasmModuleRoot()(bytes32)" --rpc-url <parent-chain-rpc>
```

Then confirm your validator agrees. On startup, the block validator logs both roots it will validate against:

```text
INFO BlockValidator initialized  current=0x8a7513bf... pending=0x8a7513bf...
INFO validator chosen           WasmModuleRoot=0x8a7513bf... chosen=jit maxWorkers=8
```

> The `current` value should match the onchain `wasmModuleRoot()`. A `validator chosen` line must appear for every root listed in `BlockValidator initialized`; if one is missing, that machine isn't available and validation for that root cannot run.

Reviewer 2: A missing machine is a fatal startup error (`cannot validate WasmModuleRoot`), not a silently missing log line.
```suggestion
The `current` value should match the onchain `wasmModuleRoot()`. A `validator chosen` line appears for every root listed in `BlockValidator initialized`; if a machine for any root is missing, startup fails with `cannot validate WasmModuleRoot`.
```

| ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------ | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `latestWasmModuleRoot not set`                                                      | No           | No machine directory was found **at all**                                                     |
| `cannot validate WasmModuleRoot <root>`                                             | No           | Machines were found, but none provides this specific required root                            |
| `unable to find validator machine directory for the on-chain WASM module root`      | Yes          | Startup compatibility pre-check failed. Logged at `ERROR`, but **does not stop the node**     |
| `on-chain WASM module root did not match with any of the allowed WASM module roots` | Yes          | Same pre-check, when `--validation.wasm.allowed-wasm-module-roots` is set and nothing matched |
| `wasmroot doesn't match rollup : <root>, valid: [<roots>]`                          | Yes          | Runtime mismatch. The validator runs but cannot advance its bond                              |

> Operators upgrading Nitro have reported the two fatal cases wrapped in a `failed to create node` startup error; the specific message quoted in that error tells you which one you're looking at.

Reviewer 2: This log line was renamed on recent Nitro.
```suggestion
Operators upgrading Nitro have reported the two fatal cases wrapped in a `failed to create node` startup error (`failed to create consensus node` on newer versions); the specific message quoted in that error tells you which one you're looking at.
```

When these differ, both are required, and a missing machine for **either** produces `cannot validate WasmModuleRoot`. This is why a validator that ran fine yesterday can fail to start today: the chain's root changed, and the pending root now resolves to something the image doesn't contain.

<VanillaAdmonition type="caution" title="Clearing `pending-upgrade-module-root` is not a fix for a Rollup mismatch">

Setting `--node.block-validator.pending-upgrade-module-root=` to an empty value only shrinks the set of roots required **at startup**. It has no effect on the runtime `wasmroot doesn't match rollup` error, which compares against the Rollup contract rather than against this flag.

So if your node starts but can't advance its bond, clearing this flag won't help—you need the correct machine on disk. Conversely, if you cleared it to work around a startup failure, you've disabled validation against the pending upgrade root, which means you won't discover a missing machine until the upgrade activates. Restore it once the correct machine is staged.

</VanillaAdmonition>

### The validator starts but can't advance its bond

> This error means the node is running, but the root in the Rollup contract isn't among the roots the block validator actually validated with:

Reviewer 2: This check exists only in the legacy staker; the BoLD staker never emits this error.
```suggestion
This error only occurs on chains still running the legacy staker—the BoLD staker doesn't perform this check. It means the node is running, but the root in the Rollup contract isn't among the roots the block validator actually validated with:
```

```text
error advancing stake from node 18 (hash 0x4d42...): error generating node action:
wasmroot doesn't match rollup : 0x260f5fa5..., valid: [0x8b104a2e...]
```

Read it as: **the Rollup contract expects the first root; your validator only has the second.** Both roots map to consensus versions you can look up in the Nitro repository's `Dockerfile`—which usually reveals that the expected root corresponds to a consensus version your image never downloaded.

The fix is to stage the machine for the root the Rollup contract expects, then restart the validator. Confirm success by checking that a `validator chosen` line appears for that root.

A related message, `block validation is still pending`, is not a mismatch—it means the block validator hasn't validated anything yet and has no roots to compare. Wait for validation to progress.

<VanillaAdmonition type="caution" title="Don't suppress the mismatch check">

> `--staker.dangerous.ignore-rollup-wasm-module-root` downgrades this error to a warning and lets the validator make assertions anyway. Its own help text describes it as dangerous, and for good reason: asserting against a module root the Rollup contract doesn't recognize risks producing assertions that can be challenged. Fix the machine, don't silence the check.

Reviewer 2: Staker flags are registered under `node.staker.*`; as written the flag isn't recognized.
```suggestion
`--node.staker.dangerous.ignore-rollup-wasm-module-root` downgrades this error to a warning and lets the validator make assertions anyway. Its own help text describes it as dangerous, and for good reason: asserting against a module root the Rollup contract doesn't recognize risks producing assertions that can be challenged. Fix the machine, don't silence the check.
```

Rolling `nitro-contracts` back is only remotely viable if no assertions have been posted that depend on the new contracts' behavior. Once they have, a revert can invalidate chain history or strand in-flight withdrawals. Treat a contracts rollback as an incident requiring support involvement, not a routine operation.

</VanillaAdmonition>

## Related documents

- [ArbOS upgrade](/launch-arbitrum-chain/operate/arbos-upgrade.mdx)—step-by-step mechanics for each upgrade action
- [ArbOS releases](/run-arbitrum-node/arbos-releases/01-overview.mdx)—per-release requirements, WASM module roots, and Nitro versions
- [Ownership and access](/launch-arbitrum-chain/operate/ownership-and-access.mdx)—which account holds which administrative role
- [Monitoring tools and considerations](/launch-arbitrum-chain/operate/monitoring.mdx)—what to watch during and after an upgrade
- [Batch poster troubleshooting](/launch-arbitrum-chain/operate/batch-poster-troubleshooting.mdx)—diagnosing batch poster errors
- [Customize your chain's behavior](/launch-arbitrum-chain/protocol-hacks/stf.mdx)—building a custom STF and its replay binary

> - [Nitro CLI flags reference](/run-arbitrum-node/nitro/cli-flags-reference.mdx)—full reference for every flag named here

Reviewer 2: The flags reference omits `dangerous` flags, so "every flag named here" overclaims.
```suggestion
- [Nitro CLI flags reference](/run-arbitrum-node/nitro/cli-flags-reference.mdx)—reference for the Nitro configuration flags named here (`dangerous` flags are not listed)
```

- **Discovery stops at the first search path that yields any machine.** One stale directory in an earlier path masks a correct one later in the search order. If `--validation.wasm.root-path` is set, it is the _only_ path searched.

When `--validation.wasm.root-path` is unset, the search order is:

1. `<project>/target/machines` (source builds)
2. `./machines`, relative to the working directory
3. `./target/machines`
4. `machines/` in the grandparent directory of the binary—for example, `/usr/local/machines` for a binary at `/usr/local/bin/nitro`

Setting `--validation.wasm.root-path` explicitly is the reliable fix when discovery picks the wrong directory.

### Understand which roots your validator is required to have

A validator must have machines for **both** roots the block validator resolves, not just the current one:

- `--node.block-validator.current-module-root` (default `current`, read from the chain)
- `--node.block-validator.pending-upgrade-module-root` (default `latest`)

> When these differ, both are required, and a missing machine for **either** produces `cannot validate WasmModuleRoot`. This is why a validator that ran fine yesterday can fail to start today: the chain's root changed, and the pending root now resolves to something the image doesn't contain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When these differ, both are required, and a missing machine for **either** produces `cannot validate WasmModuleRoot`. This is why a validator that ran fine yesterday can fail to start today: the chain's root changed, and the current root—read from the chain—now names a root with no machine in the image. Pending, by contrast, is resolved from what's on disk (via the machines/latest symlink), so it can't point at a machine you don't have; a pinned pending root that's missing fails startup with the same cannot validate WasmModuleRoot error.
```
